Article/valheim-server (#217)
MechanicalRock/mechanicalrock.github.io: _posts/2022-04-04-valheim-server.md

---
layout: post
title: Hosting a Valheim Server on AWS Part:1
date: 2022-04-04
tags: code ecs fargate cloudnative valheim deployment dedicated-server devops gaming aws
author: Joseph Miocevich
image: img/valheim-logo.webp
description:
  How to set up a dedicated server for Valheim on AWS, with some discord notifications
---

![Header](/img/valheim-logo.webp)

Do you want to set up your own Valheim Server? Are you sick of waiting for your friend to figure out how to port forward their local server? Has your wallet been raided by an 'easy' online game hosting solution? Then this is the blog post for you! Read on if you want to become a certified Viking nerd.

> Now, if you are like me, where I decide 9 pm is when I should do that documentation I've been procrastinating on, the hours that my friends play and I play rarely aligns, hence the need for a dedicated server. I’ve seen a few online tutorials on how to set up your own Valheim Server, but I took it as an opportunity to do what any semi self-loathing programmer does.... ignore it all and decide I can do better...I mean attempt to do it myself as a learning opportunity.

Author: It is a bit clunky, but I like it

If you just want the code, here you go: [ Valheim-Server-on-AWS-Part-1 ](https://github.com/JMiocevich/Valheim-Server-on-AWS-Part-1)

We are gonna separate this post into two parts. Part 1 will be the bare minimum to get a server up and running, whilst part 2 will include some fancier bells and whistles.

So let's cover some basic criteria on what creating your own virtual Vikings adventure land will entail:

- Infrastructure as code using AWS SAM (minimal clicksops)
- Easy deployment for the technically challenged
- Secure and resilient architecture
- Cost competitive against out of the box services
- Cheap

> - Ability to Auto stop server when game world is not in use

Reviewer: How do you achieve that?

Author: Will reword it

> - Get Notifications on the game state in discord (server start/stop/when a player joins)

Reviewer: Do you plan on discussing this (here or in a subsequent post?)

Picking up interesting pieces of the architecture and discussing that in more detail is good - this is a technical blog.

Reviewer: Re-reading the section above - I think you intend to do that in a future post.  

If it confused me, it will likely confuse other readers.

Suggest that you clearly split this into three sections:
* The overall requirements (this list?)
* The requirements you cover in this post
* The requirements you will cover in a future post (enough to keep them wanting more)

Reviewer: Again, to cover the technical content for the blog, an architecture diagram would be useful. 

Either here, or under the discussion section

Author: Will draw up a architecture diagram, and clarify which posts will cover content

- Automatic Backup
- Did I mention cheap?

Part 2:
- Ability to send server commands through discord (start/stop/ban players)
- Edit server settings through discord
- Automatic IP address retrieval through discord

***
<br/>
## Instructions

The following/requirements are needed.
- Basic understanding of nodeJS
- Access to AWS account with access credentials avaliable for use,  [AWS Docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-configure-files.html)
- [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com) installed
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) installed
- [AWS Command Line Interface](https://aws.amazon.com/cli/) installed
- [AWS SAM CLI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/serverless-application-model/latest/developerguide/serverless-sam-cli-install.html) installed
- Following github repo downloaded [Valheim Server](https://github.com/JMiocevich/valheim_server_aws_ts)
- [Discord WebHook](https://support.discord.com/hc/en-us/articles/228383668-Intro-to-Webhooks)

See [ setup instructions ](https://github.com/JMiocevich/Valheim-Server-on-AWS-Part-1/blob/main/README.md) for step by step instructions on setup.

## Discussion and Reasoning

> 

Reviewer: These points underline why an architecture diagram is important.

You haven't outlined anywhere else in the post what your solution is - here you are jumping into your design decisions without introducing what they are (don't make me go off and read the code).

### Why Fargate?

> Takes advantage of [valheim-server docker](ht
> tps://github.com/lloesche/valheim-server-docker), allows for simple deployment without having to manage servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Takes advantage of [valheim-server docker](https://github.com/lloesche/valheim-server-docker).  This allows for simple deployment without having to manage servers.
```

typo: Unintentional linebreak?

nitpick: improve readability

Reviewer: Did you consider AppRunner?  Or any other alternative
If you discounted it, it's worth adding some justification - shows you have considered options.

Author: Hadn't heard of app runner before this, may have been a good alternative.

### Why spot Instance?

> It's a game and is not a critical workload, and so far have not found it to be any problem in availability. Also $$$.

Reviewer: What would happen if the game server was terminated - what's the experience for the user?  Again, clearly stating your decision here is good - you accept the tradeoff - saving $$$ is more important to you than gamer interuption.

Author: The game will save, and back up to S3, with no data loss. Players will be kicked out of the server.

Allows for easy monitoring of Server Status and a player connects to the server.

![Valheim Discord Notifications](/img/valheim_discord.png)
<br/>

Instructions on how to do this are in the [ lloesche valheim-server](https://github.com/lloesche/valheim-server-docker) repo.

<br/>

### For the Cloudwatch Alarm, why use CPU Usage as a metric to track server usage?
Ideally, I would like to parse the logs/ or ping the server for player count, however, I was having trouble getting it to work reliably. In addition, this ensures that the server will not shut down if an update or backup is been actioned. 

### Why no static IP?
If the game is set to public: true, the server can be searched for using the game server browser. Save some $$$.

### Secret Manager, but why?
Good practise, Lord Myerscough will sense a disturbance in the code...be afraid.

### Cost. 
[https://aws.amazon.com/fargate/pricing/](https://aws.amazon.com/fargate/pricing/) \
[https://aws.amazon.com/s3/pricing/](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/pricing/) 

At the time of writing with 24-hour usage: \
$0.118 per hour spot instance at the time of writing \
$2.84 per day spot instance at the time of writing \
~$80 per month 

> However this is with 24-hour usage, with auto-scale down this cost reduces significantly, and you only pay for what you use. The cloud watch alarm is set to alarm if CPU usage drops below a threshold of 25/30 with a period of 60 seconds.

Reviewer: What has typical cost been for you?  And how does that compare to other options you mentioned in the introduction.  This is good to frame your solution in relation to the original requirements and the alternatives.

Author: Will add in cost comparisons

![](/img/valheim-image2.webp)

Until next time!
---

If you have questions, feel free to [reach out](https://www.mechanicalrock.io/lets-get-started), or dont... or buy me a coffee, I fully condone bribery by food.

***
<br/>
## References

| The Thing                                                                                                                                           | My thoughts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | [ lloesche valheim-server docker ](https://github.com/lloesche/valheim-server-docker)                                                                 | Awesome repo, this setup takes large advantage on the great work done my lloesche!                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [ lloesche valheim-server docker ](https://github.com/lloesche/valheim-server-docker)                                                                 | Awesome repo, the setup outlines in this post builds upon the great work done by lloesche!                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
```

Is this what you meant? The original text confused me.

> | [ How to host a dedicated Valheim server on  Amazon Lightsail ](https://aws.amazon.com/getting-started/hands-on/valheim-on-aws/)                      | Tried it, didn't work, costs too much. Be careful if you try this, lightsail assigns an Elastic IP address even if you delete the lightsail instance. This leaves an unassigned IP on your account $$$. Had to remove it via CLI as it wasn't clear that this happened or how to remove it in lightsail interface |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [ How to host a dedicated Valheim server on  Amazon Lightsail ](https://aws.amazon.com/getting-started/hands-on/valheim-on-aws/)                      | Tried it.  It didn't work.  It costs too much. Be careful if you try this, lightsail assigns an Elastic IP address even if you delete the lightsail instance. This leaves an unassigned IP on your account resulting in $$$. Had to remove it via CLI as it wasn't clear that this happened or how to remove it in lightsail interface |
```

> | [ Valheim with terraform ](https://github.com/wahlfeld/valheim-on-aws)                                                                               | I don't know terraform, but looked good, would use it as a resource if you wanted to go down this path                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [ Valheim with terraform ](https://github.com/wahlfeld/valheim-on-aws)                                                                               | I don't know terraform, but it looked good.  I would suggest you use it as a resource if you wanted to go down this path                                                                                                                                                                                             |
```
